README.md, before:

# ORAN SC RIC in Docker

This repository provides a minimal version of the **O-RAN Software Community (SC) Near-Real-time RIC** (`i-release`). It includes configuration files that enable the building and deploying of the SC RIC as a multi-container application using a single Docker command, without Kubernetes or Helm. Additionally, the repository features example monitoring and control xApps, which use the  ``E2SM_KPM`` and  ``E2SM_RC`` service modules, respectively.

## Repository Structure

This repository is organized as follows:

```
oran-sc-ric
├── e2-agents  -> Configs/code/etc required by E2 agents
│   └── srsRAN -> Config files to run srsRAN_Project gNB (with E2-Agent) with srsUE over zmq
│
├── ric
│   └── configs -> Config files for each SC RIC entity
│   └── images  -> Dockerfiles to build rtmgr_sim and ric-plt-xapp-frame-py images
│
├── xApps
│   └── python  -> Directory containing xApps written in Python
│
├── .env -> Default environment variables used to build and run SC RIC multi-docker application
├── create_ric_config_files.sh -> A script that creates config files for RIC entities.
├── docker-compose.yml -> A recipe used to build and run SC RIC multi-docker application
└── README.md
```

**Note 1:** We mostly use Docker images (i-release) provided in the [ORAN repository](https://nexus3.o-ran-sc.org/ ). However, we provide two Dockerfiles to build [`rtmgr_sim`](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-e2mgr/tree/i-release/tools/RoutingManagerSimulator) and [`ric-plt-xapp-frame-py`](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-xapp-frame-py/tree/i-release) images, as they are not available in the repository. Note that we build them with the code provided in the official [ORAN GitHub repository](https://github.com/o-ran-sc) and use branches related to `i-release`.

**Note 2:** There is no need to execute the `create_ric_config_files.sh` script, as default configs for each RIC entity are provided. However, this file might be used as a reference to see how the RIC entities are connected (i.e., one can check which IP addresses are provided for an individual entity).

## SC RIC Multi-Container Application

The SC RIC application contains the following services:

- `e2term`  &rarr; RIC E2 Termination Point that communicates with E2 agents over SCTP connections [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-e2/en/latest/), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-e2)]
- `e2mgr` &rarr; E2 Manager responsible for maintaining other RIC entities and connections with E2 agents [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-e2mgr/en/latest/), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-e2mgr)]
- `dbaas` &rarr; Redis Database acts as backend service for Shared Data Layer (SDL) [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-dbaas/en/latest/overview.html), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-dbaas)]
- `rtmgr_sim` &rarr; Routing Manager Simulator used to mimic the real Routing Manager [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-rtmgr/en/latest/), [sim code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-e2mgr/tree/i-release/tools/RoutingManagerSimulator), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-rtmgr)]
- `submgr` &rarr; Subscription Manager responsible for managing E2 subscriptions from xApps to the E2 Node [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-submgr/en/latest/user-guide.html), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-submgr)]
- `appmgr`  &rarr;  Application Manager responsible for deploying and managing RIC xApps [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-appmgr/en/latest/), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-appmgr)]
- `python_xapp_runner`  &rarr; a container with xApp Python Framework to facilitate the development and running of xApps [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-xapp-frame-py/en/latest/), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-xapp-frame-py)]

Each RIC entity is connected to [RIC Message Router](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-lib-rmr/en/latest/user-guide.html) (RMR), which acts as a peer-to-peer communication platform between entities. Therefore, each entity maintains a [routing table](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-lib-rmr/en/latest/rt_tables.html) where the routes are selected based on E2 message type.

Moreover, some entities communicate using REST API. For example, an xAPP sends a `RIC Subscription Request` message to the Subscription Manager using REST API, which translates it to an E2 message (following `E2AP` and `E2SM` ASN1 definitions) and sends it to E2 Termination (`e2term`) point. Upon a successful subscription, the `e2term` sends `RIC_INDICATION` messages directly to the xAPP over the RMR platform.  Details of this procedure can be found [here](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-submgr/en/latest/user-guide.html#architecture).

**Note 1:**  We use the Routing Manager Simulator (`rtmgr_sim`), as we pass a static routing table to all RIC entities (i.e., `ric/configs/routes.rtg`. The real Routing Manager (`rtmgr`) creates routes dynamically upon request from entities, however, it seems that the `rtmgr` requires Kubernetes and Helm to run. More investigation is needed to start it as a simple docker service without K8s and Helm.

**Note 2:** Currently, due to the usage of the static routing tables, we support multiple xApps in the following way. We add multiple endpoints in the routing entry for message type `12050` (i.e., `RIC_INDICATION`). Therefore, all `RIC_INDICATION` messages from E2 termination entity messages are sent to multiple endpoints (i.e., xApps), and then the indication messages are filtered by `Subscription ID` internally in each xApp.

## Example xApps

We provide two example [xApps](xApps/python/) designed to monitor any measurement metric exposed by an `E2SM_KPM` service module within an E2 Agent.  These xApps function by sending a `RIC Subscription Request` message, which includes a `RIC Subscription Details` Information Element crafted following the `E2SM_KPM` definition. Subsequently, they receive `RIC Indication Messages` containing measurement data adhering to the `E2SM_KPM_IndicationMessage` definition. In addition, we provide one example xApp that demonstrates the usage of the `E2SM_RC` service module.

The [simple_mon_xapp](xApps/python/simple_mon_xapp.py) serves as a basic example designed to illustrate the structure of an xApp.  It exclusively utilizes `E2SM-KPM-Report-Style-1`, enabling requests for any *E2-Node-Level* metric (i.e., aggregated metrics for the entire E2 node, for example, total DL throughput in a gNB node).

The [kpm_mon_xapp](xApps/python/kpm_mon_xapp.py) serves as a comprehensive E2SM-KPM monitor, facilitating all `E2SM-KPM-Report-Styles`(i.e., 1-5). Specifically, it allows requesting *E2-Node-Level* and *UE -Level* (e.g., individual UE DL throughput) metrics.

The [simple_rc_xapp](xApps/python/simple_rc_xapp.py) is a basic example designed to illustrate the usage of the RIC control API. So far, only Action ID 2 from RIC Control Style 2 (i.e., Slice-level PRB Quota control) is supported.

The [simple_rc_ho_xapp](xApps/python/simple_rc_ho_xapp.py) demonstrates how to trigger a handover for a specific UE to a target cell. It uses the E2SM-RC control module to send handover commands.

The [simple_xapp](xApps/python/simple_xapp.py) demonstrates how to use both E2SM-KPM monitoring and E2SM-RC control modules together.

Additionally, we provide a handy [library](xApps/python/lib/) designed to streamline xApp development. This library focuses on separating reusable code, such as communication protocols and message encoding/decoding, resulting in significantly simplified xApp implementations.

Specifically, we provide:

- [xAppBase](xApps/python/lib/xAppBase.py) class, which abstracts the intricacies of communication via the RMR platform and REST API.
- [e2sm_kpm_module](xApps/python/lib/e2sm_kpm_module.py) class, which offers a user-friendly subscription API and manages the encoding/decoding of E2SM_KPM ASN1 messages.
- [e2sm_rc_module](xApps/python/lib/e2sm_rc_module.py) class, which offers a user-friendly subscription API and manages the encoding/decoding of E2SM_RC ASN1 messages.

All files are written in Python and serve as excellent starting points for creating new xApps.

## Quick start
#### 1. SC RIC platform

To launch the SC RIC, please run the following command from the `oran-sc-ric` directory:

```bash
docker compose up
```

- To force a new build of the containers, please add a `--build` flag at the end of the previous command.
- To run it in background, please add a `-d` flag at the end of the previous command.
- For more options, check `docker compose up --help`

**Note:** Running this command for the first time may take up to a few minutes, as multiple Docker images have to be downloaded and/or built. A subsequent command execution (i.e., after the environment is ready) starts the RIC in seconds.

#### 2.  5G RAN
We set up an end-to-end 5G network using the **srsRAN_Project gNB** [[docs](https://docs.srsran.com/projects/project/en/latest/),[code](https://github.com/srsran/srsRAN_Project/)] (that is equipped with an E2 agent) and **srsUE** from **srsRAN-4g** project [[docs](https://docs.srsran.com/projects/4g/en/latest/),[code](https://github.com/srsran/srsRAN_4G)]. Please follow the official installation guidelines and remember to compile both projects with **ZeroMQ** support.

We follow this [application note](https://docs.srsran.com/projects/project/en/latest/tutorials/source/flexric/source/index.html), but use the SC RIC instead of [Flexric](https://gitlab.eurecom.fr/mosaic5g/flexric). To this end, we execute gNB and srsUE with the configs provided in the `./e2-agents/srsRAN` directory (gNB config differs only with the IP address of the RIC compared to the config from the tutorial). Note that, we use ZMQ-based RF devices for emulation of the wireless transmission between gNB and UE, therefore the entire RAN setup can be run on a single host machine.

2.1. Start Core Network (here [Open5GS](https://open5gs.org/open5gs/docs/))
```bash
cd  ./srsRAN_Project/docker/
docker compose up --build 5gc
```
2.2. Start gNB:
```bash
cd  ./srsRAN_Project/build/apps/gnb/
sudo ./gnb -c ~/oran-sc-ric/e2-agents/srsRAN/gnb_zmq.yaml
```
The gNB should connect to both the core network and the RIC.  
**Note:** The RIC uses 60s time-to-wait. Therefore, after disconnecting from RIC, an E2 agent (inside gNB) has to wait 60s before trying to connect again. Otherwise, the RIC sends an `E2 SETUP FAILURE` message and gNB is not connected to the RIC.

2.3. Start srsUE:
```bash
sudo ip netns add ue1
cd  ./srsRAN_4G/build/srsue/src/
sudo ./srsue ~/oran-sc-ric/e2-agents/srsRAN/ue_zmq.conf
```
The srsUE should connect to the 5G NR network and get an IP address (by default 10.45.1.2).
Then, you can ping the core network from the UE with the following command:
```bash
sudo ip netns exec ue1 ping -i 0.1 10.45.1.1
```

#### 3. Example xApp

To start the provided example [xApp](xApps/python/simple_mon_xapp.py), please run the following command from the `oran-sc-ric` directory:
```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner ./simple_mon_xapp.py --metrics=DRB.UEThpDl,DRB.UEThpUl
```

The xApp should subscribe to `DRB.UEThpUl` and `DRB.UEThpUl` measurements, and display the content of received `RIC_INDICATION` messages. The console output should be similar to:

```console
RIC Indication Received from gnb_001_001_0000019b for Subscription ID: 65
E2SM_KPM RIC Indication Content:
-ColletStartTime:  2024-01-26 00:08:05
-Measurements Data:
--Metric: DRB.UEThpDl, Value: 4
--Metric: DRB.UEThpUl, Value: 11367
```

**Issue:** sometimes the xApp needs to be restarted to correctly receive and display the content of the `RIC_INDICATION` messages. Interestingly, in most cases, the E2 subscription procedure is executed correctly, and `RIC_INDICATION` messages are received in the xApp container (it can be checked with Wireshark). This issue will be investigated and fixed.

**Note 1:**  The `xApps/python` directory is mounted into the `python_xapp_runner` container, therefore one can modify `simple_mon_xapp.py` (or any other file in this directory) locally and re-run it inside the `python_xapp_runner` container.

**Note 2:** Alternatively, one can first go into the container (from `oran-sc-ric` directory) and then run the xApp:
```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner /bin/bash
root@python_xapp_runner:/opt/xApps# ./simple_mon_xapp.py --metrics=DRB.UEThpDl,DRB.UEThpUl
```

**Note 3:** To start the advanced [kpm_mon_xapp](xApps/python/kpm_mon_xapp.py) xApp, which allows subscribing with all E2SM-KPM Report Styles (i.e., 1-5), please run the following command from the `oran-sc-ric` directory:
```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner ./kpm_mon_xapp.py --kpm_report_style=5
```

**Note 4:** To start an example **E2SM_RC** [simple_rc_xapp](xApps/python/simple_rc_xapp.py) xApp, which sends a RIC Control Request for the Slice Level PRB Quota change (Control Style 2, Action ID 6), please run the following command from the `oran-sc-ric` directory (use CTRL+C to exit):
```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner ./simple_rc_xapp.py
```

The example RC xApp periodically (every 5s) adjusts the number of DL PRBs available for allocation to a UE. Its console output should be similar to:

```console
11:34:29 Send RIC Control Request to E2 node ID: gnb_001_001_00019b for UE ID: 0, PRB_min: 1, PRB_max: 5
11:34:34 Send RIC Control Request to E2 node ID: gnb_001_001_00019b for UE ID: 0, PRB_min: 1, PRB_max: 275
11:34:39 Send RIC Control Request to E2 node ID: gnb_001_001_00019b for UE ID: 0, PRB_min: 1, PRB_max: 5
11:34:44 Send RIC Control Request to E2 node ID: gnb_001_001_00019b for UE ID: 0, PRB_min: 1, PRB_max: 275
...
```

Enabling gNB console trace (with `t`) allows the monitoring of changes in the downlink (DL) user equipment (UE) data rate.



**Note 5:** To trigger a handover with [simple_rc_ho_xapp](xApps/python/simple_rc_ho_xapp.py), use the following command:

```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner ./simple_rc_ho_xapp.py --e2_node_id gnb_001_001_0000019b --plmn 00101 --amf_ue_ngap_id 1 --target_nr_cell_id 0x19b1
```

To trigger another handover:

```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner ./simple_rc_ho_xapp.py --e2_node_id gnb_001_001_0000019b --plmn 00101 --amf_ue_ngap_id 1 --target_nr_cell_id 0x19b0
```

Note that everytime UE connects to the network it gets assigned a new AMF UE NGAP ID.


## xApp Development

The `xApps/python` directory is mounted into the `python_xapp_runner` container, therefore one can develop the xApp on a local machine, put it in this directory, and execute it inside the docker without restarting the SC RIC platform.

The `ric-plt-xapp-frame-py` Python module is installed in development mode (i.e., *editable installation* with `pip install -e ...`).  If you want to develop/modify the module and use your modified local version inside the `python_xapp_runner` container, please uncomment the following lines inside the `docker-compose.yml` and provide a path to your local copy of the `ric-plt-xapp-frame-py` code:

```yaml
  python_xapp_runner:
    ...
    volumes:
      ...
      # Uncomment if you want to use your local ric-plt-xapp-frame-py copy inside the container
      #- type: bind
      #  source: ./Path/to/your/local/ric-plt-xapp-frame-py
      #  target: /opt/ric-plt-xapp-frame-py
```

**Note:** It might be necessary to apply our patch (available in `ric/images/ric-plt-xapp-frame-py/`) to your local `ric-plt-xapp-frame-py` code.

## Troubleshooting

If you're not familiarized with `docker compose` tool, it is recommended to check its [website](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) and `docker compose --help` output.

#### Run a single service

Instead of running all services provided, a partial run is allowed by doing:

```bash
docker compose up <service_name>
```
Note that any service declared in the ``docker-compose.yml`` file can be started standalone.

#### Checking services' output
If a service is started in the background, one can check its output with the following command:

```bash
docker compose logs [OPTIONS] [SERVICE...]
```

- For more options, check `docker compose logs --help`

#### To stop RIC:

When running in the foreground, the entire SC RIC multi-container application can be stopped with the `Ctrl+C` signal.

When running in the background, please execute:

```bash
docker compose down
```
For more options, check `docker compose down --help`

#### Monitor RIC communication:

You can use Wireshark to track all messages exchanged among RIC entities. To this end, you need to start sniffing on the network bridge interface created by Docker for the RIC. Please execute `ifconfig` to check which interface has the IP address used by the RIC network (i.e., by default it should be `10.0.2.1`).

If you want to monitor only E2AP packets then set the Wireshark filter to `e2ap`, then right-click on any packet, then go to `Decode As..` and set `Current` to `E2AP`.

**Note:**  You need at least Wireshark version 4.0.7 to display content of E2AP packets correctly. It should be the default version available for installation in Ubuntu 23.04. However, it is recommended to use higher versions (e.g., Wireshark version 4.1.0 (v4.1.0rc0-3390-g4f4a54e6d3f9)) that have to be built from the [source code](https://github.com/wireshark/wireshark).


#### Run RIC on a separate host PC

To run multi-container RIC app on a separate host PC, please uncomment the following lines in the ``e2term`` section of the ``docker-compose.yml``:
```yaml
  e2term:
    ...
    #Uncomment ports to use the RIC from outside the docker network.
    ports:
      - "36421:36421/sctp"
```

Then in the gnb config file please use the following IPs:

```yaml
e2:
  ...
  addr: x.x.x.x        -> IP address of the host PC runing RIC docker container
  bind_addr: y.y.y.y   -> IP address of the gnb host PC
  ...
```

Commit message:

xApps: add e2sm-ccc module and an example xApp using it

README.md, after:

# ORAN SC RIC in Docker

This repository provides a minimal version of the **O-RAN Software Community (SC) Near-Real-time RIC** (`i-release`). It includes configuration files that enable the building and deploying of the SC RIC as a multi-container application using a single Docker command, without Kubernetes or Helm. Additionally, the repository features example monitoring and control xApps, which use the  ``E2SM_KPM`` and  ``E2SM_RC`` service modules, respectively.

## Repository Structure

This repository is organized as follows:

```
oran-sc-ric
├── e2-agents  -> Configs/code/etc required by E2 agents
│   └── srsRAN -> Config files to run srsRAN_Project gNB (with E2-Agent) with srsUE over zmq
│
├── ric
│   └── configs -> Config files for each SC RIC entity
│   └── images  -> Dockerfiles to build rtmgr_sim and ric-plt-xapp-frame-py images
│
├── xApps
│   └── python  -> Directory containing xApps written in Python
│
├── .env -> Default environment variables used to build and run SC RIC multi-docker application
├── create_ric_config_files.sh -> A script that creates config files for RIC entities.
├── docker-compose.yml -> A recipe used to build and run SC RIC multi-docker application
└── README.md
```

**Note 1:** We mostly use Docker images (i-release) provided in the [ORAN repository](https://nexus3.o-ran-sc.org/ ). However, we provide two Dockerfiles to build [`rtmgr_sim`](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-e2mgr/tree/i-release/tools/RoutingManagerSimulator) and [`ric-plt-xapp-frame-py`](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-xapp-frame-py/tree/i-release) images, as they are not available in the repository. Note that we build them with the code provided in the official [ORAN GitHub repository](https://github.com/o-ran-sc) and use branches related to `i-release`.

**Note 2:** There is no need to execute the `create_ric_config_files.sh` script, as default configs for each RIC entity are provided. However, this file might be used as a reference to see how the RIC entities are connected (i.e., one can check which IP addresses are provided for an individual entity).

## SC RIC Multi-Container Application

The SC RIC application contains the following services:

- `e2term`  &rarr; RIC E2 Termination Point that communicates with E2 agents over SCTP connections [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-e2/en/latest/), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-e2)]
- `e2mgr` &rarr; E2 Manager responsible for maintaining other RIC entities and connections with E2 agents [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-e2mgr/en/latest/), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-e2mgr)]
- `dbaas` &rarr; Redis Database acts as backend service for Shared Data Layer (SDL) [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-dbaas/en/latest/overview.html), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-dbaas)]
- `rtmgr_sim` &rarr; Routing Manager Simulator used to mimic the real Routing Manager [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-rtmgr/en/latest/), [sim code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-e2mgr/tree/i-release/tools/RoutingManagerSimulator), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-rtmgr)]
- `submgr` &rarr; Subscription Manager responsible for managing E2 subscriptions from xApps to the E2 Node [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-submgr/en/latest/user-guide.html), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-submgr)]
- `appmgr`  &rarr;  Application Manager responsible for deploying and managing RIC xApps [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-appmgr/en/latest/), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-appmgr)]
- `python_xapp_runner`  &rarr; a container with xApp Python Framework to facilitate the development and running of xApps [[docs](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-xapp-frame-py/en/latest/), [code](https://github.com/o-ran-sc/ric-plt-xapp-frame-py)]

Each RIC entity is connected to [RIC Message Router](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-lib-rmr/en/latest/user-guide.html) (RMR), which acts as a peer-to-peer communication platform between entities. Therefore, each entity maintains a [routing table](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-lib-rmr/en/latest/rt_tables.html) where the routes are selected based on E2 message type.

Moreover, some entities communicate using REST API. For example, an xAPP sends a `RIC Subscription Request` message to the Subscription Manager using REST API, which translates it to an E2 message (following `E2AP` and `E2SM` ASN1 definitions) and sends it to E2 Termination (`e2term`) point. Upon a successful subscription, the `e2term` sends `RIC_INDICATION` messages directly to the xAPP over the RMR platform.  Details of this procedure can be found [here](https://docs.o-ran-sc.org/projects/o-ran-sc-ric-plt-submgr/en/latest/user-guide.html#architecture).

**Note 1:**  We use the Routing Manager Simulator (`rtmgr_sim`), as we pass a static routing table to all RIC entities (i.e., `ric/configs/routes.rtg`. The real Routing Manager (`rtmgr`) creates routes dynamically upon request from entities, however, it seems that the `rtmgr` requires Kubernetes and Helm to run. More investigation is needed to start it as a simple docker service without K8s and Helm.

**Note 2:** Currently, due to the usage of the static routing tables, we support multiple xApps in the following way. We add multiple endpoints in the routing entry for message type `12050` (i.e., `RIC_INDICATION`). Therefore, all `RIC_INDICATION` messages from E2 termination entity messages are sent to multiple endpoints (i.e., xApps), and then the indication messages are filtered by `Subscription ID` internally in each xApp.

## Example xApps

We provide two example [xApps](xApps/python/) designed to monitor any measurement metric exposed by an `E2SM_KPM` service module within an E2 Agent.  These xApps function by sending a `RIC Subscription Request` message, which includes a `RIC Subscription Details` Information Element crafted following the `E2SM_KPM` definition. Subsequently, they receive `RIC Indication Messages` containing measurement data adhering to the `E2SM_KPM_IndicationMessage` definition. In addition, we provide one example xApp that demonstrates the usage of the `E2SM_RC` service module.

The [simple_mon_xapp](xApps/python/simple_mon_xapp.py) serves as a basic example designed to illustrate the structure of an xApp.  It exclusively utilizes `E2SM-KPM-Report-Style-1`, enabling requests for any *E2-Node-Level* metric (i.e., aggregated metrics for the entire E2 node, for example, total DL throughput in a gNB node).

The [kpm_mon_xapp](xApps/python/kpm_mon_xapp.py) serves as a comprehensive E2SM-KPM monitor, facilitating all `E2SM-KPM-Report-Styles`(i.e., 1-5). Specifically, it allows requesting *E2-Node-Level* and *UE -Level* (e.g., individual UE DL throughput) metrics.

The [simple_rc_xapp](xApps/python/simple_rc_xapp.py) is a basic example designed to illustrate the usage of the RIC control API. So far, only Action ID 2 from RIC Control Style 2 (i.e., Slice-level PRB Quota control) is supported.

The [simple_rc_ho_xapp](xApps/python/simple_rc_ho_xapp.py) demonstrates how to trigger a handover for a specific UE to a target cell. It uses the E2SM-RC control module to send handover commands.

The [simple_ccc_xapp](xApps/python/simple_ccc_xapp.py) is a basic example designed to illustrate the usage of the E2SM-CCC control.

The [simple_xapp](xApps/python/simple_xapp.py) demonstrates how to use both E2SM-KPM monitoring and E2SM-RC control modules together.

Additionally, we provide a handy [library](xApps/python/lib/) designed to streamline xApp development. This library focuses on separating reusable code, such as communication protocols and message encoding/decoding, resulting in significantly simplified xApp implementations.

Specifically, we provide:

- [xAppBase](xApps/python/lib/xAppBase.py) class, which abstracts the intricacies of communication via the RMR platform and REST API.
- [e2sm_kpm_module](xApps/python/lib/e2sm_kpm_module.py) class, which offers a user-friendly subscription API and manages the encoding/decoding of E2SM_KPM ASN1 messages.
- [e2sm_rc_module](xApps/python/lib/e2sm_rc_module.py) class, which offers a user-friendly subscription API and manages the encoding/decoding of E2SM_RC ASN1 messages.

All files are written in Python and serve as excellent starting points for creating new xApps.

## Quick start
#### 1. SC RIC platform

To launch the SC RIC, please run the following command from the `oran-sc-ric` directory:

```bash
docker compose up
```

- To force a new build of the containers, please add a `--build` flag at the end of the previous command.
- To run it in background, please add a `-d` flag at the end of the previous command.
- For more options, check `docker compose up --help`

**Note:** Running this command for the first time may take up to a few minutes, as multiple Docker images have to be downloaded and/or built. A subsequent command execution (i.e., after the environment is ready) starts the RIC in seconds.

#### 2.  5G RAN
We set up an end-to-end 5G network using the **srsRAN_Project gNB** [[docs](https://docs.srsran.com/projects/project/en/latest/),[code](https://github.com/srsran/srsRAN_Project/)] (that is equipped with an E2 agent) and **srsUE** from **srsRAN-4g** project [[docs](https://docs.srsran.com/projects/4g/en/latest/),[code](https://github.com/srsran/srsRAN_4G)]. Please follow the official installation guidelines and remember to compile both projects with **ZeroMQ** support.

We follow this [application note](https://docs.srsran.com/projects/project/en/latest/tutorials/source/flexric/source/index.html), but use the SC RIC instead of [Flexric](https://gitlab.eurecom.fr/mosaic5g/flexric). To this end, we execute gNB and srsUE with the configs provided in the `./e2-agents/srsRAN` directory (gNB config differs only with the IP address of the RIC compared to the config from the tutorial). Note that, we use ZMQ-based RF devices for emulation of the wireless transmission between gNB and UE, therefore the entire RAN setup can be run on a single host machine.

2.1. Start Core Network (here [Open5GS](https://open5gs.org/open5gs/docs/))
```bash
cd  ./srsRAN_Project/docker/
docker compose up --build 5gc
```
2.2. Start gNB:
```bash
cd  ./srsRAN_Project/build/apps/gnb/
sudo ./gnb -c ~/oran-sc-ric/e2-agents/srsRAN/gnb_zmq.yaml
```
The gNB should connect to both the core network and the RIC.  
**Note:** The RIC uses 60s time-to-wait. Therefore, after disconnecting from RIC, an E2 agent (inside gNB) has to wait 60s before trying to connect again. Otherwise, the RIC sends an `E2 SETUP FAILURE` message and gNB is not connected to the RIC.

2.3. Start srsUE:
```bash
sudo ip netns add ue1
cd  ./srsRAN_4G/build/srsue/src/
sudo ./srsue ~/oran-sc-ric/e2-agents/srsRAN/ue_zmq.conf
```
The srsUE should connect to the 5G NR network and get an IP address (by default 10.45.1.2).
Then, you can ping the core network from the UE with the following command:
```bash
sudo ip netns exec ue1 ping -i 0.1 10.45.1.1
```

#### 3. Example xApp

To start the provided example [xApp](xApps/python/simple_mon_xapp.py), please run the following command from the `oran-sc-ric` directory:
```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner ./simple_mon_xapp.py --metrics=DRB.UEThpDl,DRB.UEThpUl
```

The xApp should subscribe to `DRB.UEThpUl` and `DRB.UEThpUl` measurements, and display the content of received `RIC_INDICATION` messages. The console output should be similar to:

```console
RIC Indication Received from gnb_001_001_0000019b for Subscription ID: 65
E2SM_KPM RIC Indication Content:
-ColletStartTime:  2024-01-26 00:08:05
-Measurements Data:
--Metric: DRB.UEThpDl, Value: 4
--Metric: DRB.UEThpUl, Value: 11367
```

**Issue:** sometimes the xApp needs to be restarted to correctly receive and display the content of the `RIC_INDICATION` messages. Interestingly, in most cases, the E2 subscription procedure is executed correctly, and `RIC_INDICATION` messages are received in the xApp container (it can be checked with Wireshark). This issue will be investigated and fixed.

**Note 1:**  The `xApps/python` directory is mounted into the `python_xapp_runner` container, therefore one can modify `simple_mon_xapp.py` (or any other file in this directory) locally and re-run it inside the `python_xapp_runner` container.

**Note 2:** Alternatively, one can first go into the container (from `oran-sc-ric` directory) and then run the xApp:
```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner /bin/bash
root@python_xapp_runner:/opt/xApps# ./simple_mon_xapp.py --metrics=DRB.UEThpDl,DRB.UEThpUl
```

**Note 3:** To start the advanced [kpm_mon_xapp](xApps/python/kpm_mon_xapp.py) xApp, which allows subscribing with all E2SM-KPM Report Styles (i.e., 1-5), please run the following command from the `oran-sc-ric` directory:
```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner ./kpm_mon_xapp.py --kpm_report_style=5
```

**Note 4:** To start an example **E2SM_RC** [simple_rc_xapp](xApps/python/simple_rc_xapp.py) xApp, which sends a RIC Control Request for the Slice Level PRB Quota change (Control Style 2, Action ID 6), please run the following command from the `oran-sc-ric` directory (use CTRL+C to exit):
```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner ./simple_rc_xapp.py
```

The example RC xApp periodically (every 5s) adjusts the number of DL PRBs available for allocation to a UE. Its console output should be similar to:

```console
11:34:29 Send RIC Control Request to E2 node ID: gnb_001_001_00019b for UE ID: 0, PRB_min: 1, PRB_max: 5
11:34:34 Send RIC Control Request to E2 node ID: gnb_001_001_00019b for UE ID: 0, PRB_min: 1, PRB_max: 275
11:34:39 Send RIC Control Request to E2 node ID: gnb_001_001_00019b for UE ID: 0, PRB_min: 1, PRB_max: 5
11:34:44 Send RIC Control Request to E2 node ID: gnb_001_001_00019b for UE ID: 0, PRB_min: 1, PRB_max: 275
...
```

Enabling gNB console trace (with `t`) allows the monitoring of changes in the downlink (DL) user equipment (UE) data rate.


**Note 5:** To trigger a handover with [simple_rc_ho_xapp](xApps/python/simple_rc_ho_xapp.py), use the following command:

```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner ./simple_rc_ho_xapp.py --e2_node_id gnb_001_001_0000019b --plmn 00101 --amf_ue_ngap_id 1 --target_nr_cell_id 0x19b1
```

To trigger another handover:

```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner ./simple_rc_ho_xapp.py --e2_node_id gnb_001_001_0000019b --plmn 00101 --amf_ue_ngap_id 1 --target_nr_cell_id 0x19b0
```

Note that everytime UE connects to the network it gets assigned a new AMF UE NGAP ID.

**Note 6:** To start an example **E2SM_CCC** [simple_ccc_xapp](xApps/python/simple_ccc_xapp.py) xApp, which sends a RIC Control Request with O-RRMPolicyRatio config structure, please run the following command from the `oran-sc-ric` directory (use CTRL+C to exit):
```bash
docker compose exec python_xapp_runner ./simple_ccc_xapp.py
```

## xApp Development

The `xApps/python` directory is mounted into the `python_xapp_runner` container, therefore one can develop the xApp on a local machine, put it in this directory, and execute it inside the docker without restarting the SC RIC platform.

The `ric-plt-xapp-frame-py` Python module is installed in development mode (i.e., *editable installation* with `pip install -e ...`).  If you want to develop/modify the module and use your modified local version inside the `python_xapp_runner` container, please uncomment the following lines inside the `docker-compose.yml` and provide a path to your local copy of the `ric-plt-xapp-frame-py` code:

```yaml
  python_xapp_runner:
    ...
    volumes:
      ...
      # Uncomment if you want to use your local ric-plt-xapp-frame-py copy inside the container
      #- type: bind
      #  source: ./Path/to/your/local/ric-plt-xapp-frame-py
      #  target: /opt/ric-plt-xapp-frame-py
```

**Note:** It might be necessary to apply our patch (available in `ric/images/ric-plt-xapp-frame-py/`) to your local `ric-plt-xapp-frame-py` code.

## Troubleshooting

If you're not familiarized with `docker compose` tool, it is recommended to check its [website](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) and `docker compose --help` output.

#### Run a single service

Instead of running all services provided, a partial run is allowed by doing:

```bash
docker compose up <service_name>
```
Note that any service declared in the ``docker-compose.yml`` file can be started standalone.

#### Checking services' output
If a service is started in the background, one can check its output with the following command:

```bash
docker compose logs [OPTIONS] [SERVICE...]
```

- For more options, check `docker compose logs --help`

#### To stop RIC:

When running in the foreground, the entire SC RIC multi-container application can be stopped with the `Ctrl+C` signal.

When running in the background, please execute:

```bash
docker compose down
```
For more options, check `docker compose down --help`

#### Monitor RIC communication:

You can use Wireshark to track all messages exchanged among RIC entities. To this end, you need to start sniffing on the network bridge interface created by Docker for the RIC. Please execute `ifconfig` to check which interface has the IP address used by the RIC network (i.e., by default it should be `10.0.2.1`).

If you want to monitor only E2AP packets then set the Wireshark filter to `e2ap`, then right-click on any packet, then go to `Decode As..` and set `Current` to `E2AP`.

**Note:**  You need at least Wireshark version 4.0.7 to display content of E2AP packets correctly. It should be the default version available for installation in Ubuntu 23.04. However, it is recommended to use higher versions (e.g., Wireshark version 4.1.0 (v4.1.0rc0-3390-g4f4a54e6d3f9)) that have to be built from the [source code](https://github.com/wireshark/wireshark).


#### Run RIC on a separate host PC

To run multi-container RIC app on a separate host PC, please uncomment the following lines in the ``e2term`` section of the ``docker-compose.yml``:
```yaml
  e2term:
    ...
    #Uncomment ports to use the RIC from outside the docker network.
    ports:
      - "36421:36421/sctp"
```

Then in the gnb config file please use the following IPs:

```yaml
e2:
  ...
  addr: x.x.x.x        -> IP address of the host PC runing RIC docker container
  bind_addr: y.y.y.y   -> IP address of the gnb host PC
  ...
```
